tools/README.md, before:

# Tools Documentation

This directory contains guides and documentation for specific command-line and productivity tools used in the workspace.

## Index of Tool Guides

- **[Atuin](./atuin.md):** Configuration and usage for the magical shell history tool.
- **[Chezmoi Modify Manager](./chezmoi-modify-manager.md):** A tool to manage chezmoi modifications.
- **[Chrome-Plasma Integration](./chrome-plasma.md):** Notes on integrating Chrome with the Plasma desktop.
- **[Continue Dev](./continue-dev.md):** Documentation for the Continue.dev AI code assistant in VSCodium.
- **[CopyQ](./copyq.md):** Guide for the CopyQ clipboard manager.
- **[Gemini CLI](./gemini-cli.md):** Documentation for the Gemini CLI tool.
- **[KDE Connect](./kde-connect.md):** Setup for phone-desktop integration.
- **[Kitty](./kitty/):** All documentation related to kitty terminal.
- **[LLM CLI](./llm-cli.md):** Guide for the LLM command-line interaction tool.
- **[Navi](./navi.md):** Setup for the interactive cheatsheet tool.
- **[Plasma Manager](./plasma-manager.md):** Documentation for the declarative KDE Plasma configuration manager.
- **[Semantic Grep](./semantic-grep.md):** Guide for the AI-powered code search tool.
- **[VSCodium](./vscodium.md):** Setup and extension documentation for VSCodium.

Commit message:

docs: add agents & ck research updates

tools/README.md, after:

# Tools Documentation

This directory contains guides and documentation for specific command-line and productivity tools used in the workspace.

## Index of Tool Guides

- **[Atuin](./atuin.md):** Configuration and usage for the magical shell history tool.
- **[Chezmoi Modify Manager](./chezmoi-modify-manager.md):** A tool to manage chezmoi modifications.
- **[Chrome-Plasma Integration](./chrome-plasma.md):** Notes on integrating Chrome with the Plasma desktop.
- **[Codex](./codex.md):** Documentation for the OpenAI Codex CLI. ([Optimization Research](./codex/optimization-research.md))
- **[Continue Dev](./continue-dev.md):** Documentation for the Continue.dev AI code assistant in VSCodium.
- **[CopyQ](./copyq.md):** Guide for the CopyQ clipboard manager.
- **[Gemini CLI](./gemini-cli.md):** Documentation for the Gemini CLI tool. ([Optimization Research](./gemini-cli/optimization-research.md))
- **[KDE Connect](./kde-connect.md):** Setup for phone-desktop integration.
- **[Kitty](./kitty/):** All documentation related to kitty terminal.
- **[LLM CLI](./llm-cli.md):** Guide for the LLM command-line interaction tool. ([Claude Code Optimization](./claude-code/optimization-research.md))
- **[Navi](./navi.md):** Setup for the interactive cheatsheet tool.
- **[Plasma Manager](./plasma-manager.md):** Documentation for the declarative KDE Plasma configuration manager.
- **[Semantic Grep](./semantic-grep.md):** Guide for the AI-powered code search tool.
- **[VSCodium](./vscodium.md):** Setup and extension documentation for VSCodium. ([Agent Integration](../commons/integrations/vscodium-kitty-agents.md))
